════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
  BITUMENGRADER — USER GUIDE  v1.0
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════

SECTION 1 — WHAT THIS APPLICATION DOES
--------------------------------------

BitumenGrader is a desktop application that looks at photographs of bitumen
(asphalt binder) samples and predicts three key composition percentages:
Water, Solids, and Bitumen content. Instead of relying only on a lab
technician's eye or a full physical extraction test, you can point the
application at a photo and get an instant, repeatable numeric estimate for
each of the three values, expressed as a percentage of the sample.

Under the hood, BitumenGrader uses something called a CNN (Convolutional
Neural Network) — specifically a "regressor" that predicts numbers rather
than picking a category. Think of a CNN as a pattern-recognition system
that has been shown thousands of example photographs, each one labelled
with its true, lab-measured Water/Solids/Bitumen percentages, until it has
learned to notice the small visual differences (colour, texture, sheen)
that tend to correlate with those measurements. Once it has learned these
patterns, you can show it a brand new photo it has never seen before and it
will predict its best estimate of all three percentages, the same way an
experienced technician can often estimate a sample's composition "by eye"
after years of practice.

Because a well-formed sample's Water, Solids, and Bitumen percentages
should always add up to close to 100%, BitumenGrader also shows a "sum
check" alongside every prediction so you can quickly judge how internally
consistent — and therefore how trustworthy — a given result is. From the
predicted Bitumen percentage, BitumenGrader also shows an approximate "Pan
grade" indicator (grades 3 through 6), a quick-reference bucket based on
where that Bitumen value falls within the range your training data covered.
See Section 3 for how to read both of these on the Grade Images page.


SECTION 2 — GETTING STARTED: SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
-------------------------------------------------

Before you can run BitumenGrader, make sure your computer has:

  1. Python 3.9 or newer installed (Python is the programming language the
     application is written in). You can check your installed version by
     opening a terminal (Command Prompt on Windows, Terminal on Mac/Linux)
     and typing:

         python --version

  2. An operating system of Windows 10/11, macOS 11 or newer, or a modern
     Linux distribution (e.g. Ubuntu 20.04+). BitumenGrader does not
     require an internet connection to run day-to-day, only to install its
     dependencies the first time.

  3. At least 4 GB of free disk space (PyTorch, the machine-learning
     library BitumenGrader depends on, is fairly large) and, ideally,
     4 GB or more of RAM.

INSTALLING THE REQUIRED SOFTWARE

  BitumenGrader depends on several third-party libraries (listed in the
  file "requirements.txt"). To install them, open a terminal, navigate to
  the BitumenGrader folder, and run:

         pip install -r requirements.txt

  This downloads and installs everything the application needs, including
  PyTorch (the machine-learning engine), PyQt6 (the window/interface
  toolkit), and Pillow (for opening and editing images). This step can
  take several minutes the first time.

LAUNCHING THE APPLICATION

  Once installation finishes, start BitumenGrader by running:

         python main.py

  A window titled "BitumenGrader" should appear on your screen, centered,
  with a dark sidebar on the left listing four sections: Import Images,
  Train Model, Grade Images, and Model Library.


SECTION 3 — STEP-BY-STEP: GRADING IMAGES WITH AN EXISTING MODEL
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Follow these steps if someone has already trained a model (or you trained
one previously) and you simply want to predict Water/Solids/Bitumen values
for some new sample photos.

  1. Open the application (see Section 2 if you have not already).

  2. In the left-hand sidebar, click "Model Library".

  3. Find the model you want to use in the grid of model cards. Each card
     shows the model's name, the date it was created, a blue "Regression"
     tag, how many epochs it was trained for, and a summary of its best
     validation performance in plain measurement terms: "Water ±X.XX%
     Solids ±X.XX% Bitumen ±X.XX%" (see Section 8 for what these ± numbers
     mean). Click "Details" on any card to expand its full MAE curve, loss
     curve, and the output normalisation stats used at training time.

  4. Click the amber "Load Model" button on that card. The button changes
     to show a checkmark, and the card gets a thin amber highlight down
     its left edge, confirming that model is now active. You will also
     see the model's name and its MAE summary appear at the bottom of the
     sidebar and in the application's title bar.

  5. Click "Grade Images" in the sidebar.

  6. Near the top, you should now see a bar confirming the active model's
     name and the date it was created. If it instead shows an amber
     warning saying "No model loaded — go to Model Library first," go
     back to step 3.

  7. Click "Add Images" (or drag and drop image files directly onto the
     image queue on the left) to load the photographs you want graded.
     Supported file types are .jpg, .jpeg, .png, and .tif.

  8. Click the amber "Grade All" button to grade every image in the queue
     at once, or select a single image in the queue and click "Grade This
     Image" to grade just that one.

  9. Read your results:
       - Click any single image in the queue to see a large preview and a
         results card with a measurement table listing the predicted
         Water, Solids, and Bitumen percentages next to the training
         data's average value for each, plus a Sum row showing how close
         all three predictions add up to 100%.
       - The Sum row is colour-coded: green means the predictions are
         within 2% of 100 (highly self-consistent), amber means 2–5%
         deviation (usable, but worth a second look), and red means more
         than 5% deviation (treat this particular prediction with extra
         caution — see Section 8).
       - Below the table, a horizontal range bar for each output shows
         where the prediction falls relative to the low/high range seen
         in the training data, and a "Closest Pan grade" card shows an
         approximate Pan grade (3 through 6) derived from the predicted
         Bitumen percentage.
     After grading a whole batch, a summary card also shows the total
     number of images graded, the mean Water/Solids/Bitumen values across
     the batch, the mean sum deviation, and how many images had a sum
     deviation over 5% ("sum warnings").

  10. To keep a permanent record, click "Export CSV" (available from both
      the single-image and batch results views). Choose where to save the
      file, and BitumenGrader will write a CSV (comma-separated values)
      file — a simple spreadsheet-style file you can open in Excel or any
      spreadsheet program — listing every image along with its predicted
      Water, Solids, Bitumen, and Sum values, whether the sum passed the
      5% consistency check, and its approximate Pan grade.

  11. If you want to start over with a new batch, click "Clear Results"
      (or "Clear All" to also empty the image queue itself).


SECTION 4 — STEP-BY-STEP: TRAINING A NEW MODEL
-------------------------------------------------

Follow these steps when you want to train BitumenGrader on your own set of
sample photographs and their known Water/Solids/Bitumen/Pan lab values.

  1. Prepare your data first. You need two things:
       - A CSV (spreadsheet) file with one row per sample image, and
         columns named exactly "Image", "Pan", "Water", "Solids", and
         "Bitumen". The "Image" column should hold each photo's filename
         (with or without its file extension — BitumenGrader tries both
         automatically when matching).
       - A folder containing all of the actual image files referenced in
         that CSV.
     Recommended quantities, per Pan grade (3 through 6) you want the
     model to learn a good range of:
       - Minimum: at least 50 images per Pan grade.
       - Recommended: 200 or more images per Pan grade, for noticeably
         better and more reliable predictions.
     Try to vary lighting, angle, and sample size slightly across your
     photos — a model trained on very uniform photos may struggle with
     real-world variety later.

  2. In the sidebar, click "Train Model".

  3. Under "Step 1 — Load CSV File," drag and drop your CSV onto the
     dashed drop zone, or click "Browse" and select it. Once loaded, you
     will see a preview of its first 10 rows and a summary of which
     column BitumenGrader is using for filenames, outputs, and the
     display-only Pan column. If your CSV is missing any required
     columns, a red banner lists exactly which ones and what is expected.

  4. Under "Step 2 — Select Image Folder," click "Select Folder" and
     choose the folder containing your images. BitumenGrader immediately
     matches every filename in your CSV against the files in that folder
     and shows a match summary card: "N of M images matched," colour-coded
     green (over 90% matched), amber (50–90%), or red (under 50%). Click
     "Show unmatched filenames" to see exactly which rows could not be
     matched. If your match rate is low, double-check that the filenames
     in your CSV correspond to real files in the selected folder.

  5. Once your CSV and folder both check out, "Step 3 — Dataset Summary"
     appears automatically, showing your total matched sample count, how
     many go to training versus validation (based on the Validation Split
     setting), the min/max/mean range of each output value, and a Pan
     grade distribution with a small bar per grade so you can spot gaps
     in your data before you start training.

  6. On the right-hand side, fill in the training settings:
       - Give your model a memorable name in the "Model Name" field (for
         example "RefineryA_June2026").
       - Adjust the hyperparameters if needed — click the small (i) icon
         next to "Hyperparameters" for a plain-English explanation of
         each one inline, or see Section 5 for the full reference. The
         defaults are a safe starting point if you are unsure.

  7. Click the amber "Start Training" button. (It stays disabled, with a
     tooltip explaining why, until Steps 1–3 are complete and a model
     name has been entered.)

  8. Watch the live progress panel while training runs:
       - The epoch bar shows "Epoch N / (total)" with a progress bar.
       - If validation performance stops improving, an amber patience
         indicator appears: "No improvement for N epochs (patience: P)."
       - A metrics row updates every epoch with the current Train Loss,
         Val Loss, and Water/Solids/Bitumen MAE (Mean Absolute Error —
         see Section 8 for what this means in plain terms).
       - A "Sum deviation" row shows how close validation predictions add
         up to 100%, colour-coded the same way as on the Grade Images page.
       - Two live charts plot the loss curve (train vs. validation) and
         the MAE curve (one line per output) as training progresses.
       - A scrolling, timestamped log records every epoch's numbers, so
         you can review the full run afterward.
     You can click "Stop Training" at any time to cleanly halt the process
     early if needed — nothing is lost; whatever the best checkpoint was
     up to that point is still saved.

  9. When training finishes, one of two banners appears:
       - A green completion banner: "Training complete — [Model Name]
         saved. Best: Water ±X.XX% Solids ±X.XX% Bitumen ±X.XX%," with a
         "View in Model Library →" link.
       - An amber early-stopping banner if the Early Stopping Patience
         setting kicked in before your chosen Epochs count was reached,
         showing the same best-MAE summary.
     Either way, the model is saved automatically to the Model Library and
     becomes your active model right away, so you can go straight to
     "Grade Images" to try it out.


SECTION 5 — HYPERPARAMETER REFERENCE
----------------------------------------

"Hyperparameters" are the settings you choose before training starts that
control how the model learns. You do not need to change any of them to get
a working model — the defaults are sensible starting points — but
understanding them helps you fine-tune results.

  EPOCHS
    What it does: One epoch is one complete pass through every training
      image. More epochs means the model studies your images more times.
    Increase it when: the training loss is still decreasing and hasn't
      leveled off yet, or your dataset is small.
    Decrease it when: validation loss stops improving or starts getting
      worse while training loss keeps dropping (a sign of "overfitting" —
      the model is memorizing your exact photos instead of learning
      general patterns).
    Recommended starting value: 30.

  BATCH SIZE
    What it does: The number of images the model looks at together before
      updating what it has learned. Smaller batches update more often but
      more noisily; larger batches are steadier but need more memory.
    Increase it when: you have a large dataset and plenty of memory, and
      want smoother, more stable training.
    Decrease it when: training is slow, your computer runs out of memory,
      or your dataset is small.
    Recommended starting value: 32.

  LEARNING RATE
    What it does: Controls how big a step the model takes each time it
      adjusts itself based on what it just got right or wrong. Think of it
      as the model's "stride length" while learning.
    Increase it when: training is progressing very slowly and loss (the
      model's error measurement) is barely decreasing.
    Decrease it when: the loss curve looks jumpy or unstable, or the model
      seems to be getting worse instead of better.
    Recommended starting value: 0.001.

  OPTIMIZER
    What it does: The mathematical strategy the model uses to decide how
      to adjust itself after each mistake. "Adam" automatically adapts its
      own step sizes as it goes, making it forgiving and easy to use.
      "SGD" (Stochastic Gradient Descent) is a simpler, more traditional
      method that can sometimes reach a slightly better end result but
      usually needs more careful tuning of the learning rate.
    Increase/decrease: this is a choice rather than a number — start with
      Adam, and only try SGD later if you want to experiment.
    Recommended starting value: Adam.

  WEIGHT DECAY
    What it does: A small penalty that discourages the model from relying
      too heavily on any single detail, which helps it generalize better
      to new images instead of memorizing the training set (this
      technique is called "regularization").
    Increase it when: the model's validation loss is noticeably worse than
      its training loss (overfitting).
    Decrease it when: the model seems to be learning too slowly or
      underperforming on both training and validation images.
    Recommended starting value: 0.0001.

  VALIDATION SPLIT
    What it does: The percentage of your images that are set aside and
      never shown to the model during training, so they can be used
      afterward to fairly check how well it actually learned.
    Increase it when: you have a lot of images and want a more trustworthy
      MAE estimate.
    Decrease it when: you have relatively few images and want to give the
      model as much training data as possible.
    Recommended starting value: 20%.

  PRETRAINED BACKBONE
    What it does: When checked, the model starts from a version that has
      already learned general visual features (edges, textures, shapes)
      from millions of unrelated photographs, then adapts that existing
      knowledge to predicting Water/Solids/Bitumen content. When
      unchecked, it starts from a blank slate and must learn everything
      from scratch.
    Increase (turn on) when: you have a smaller dataset or want faster,
      more reliable results — this is almost always the better choice.
    Decrease (turn off) when: you have a very large dataset and want to
      experiment with training entirely from scratch.
    Recommended starting value: On (checked).

  NORMALISE TARGETS
    What it does: Scales the Water, Solids, and Bitumen values onto a
      common numeric range during training, so the model learns to
      predict all three outputs equally well instead of focusing mostly
      on whichever one naturally has the largest raw numbers.
    Increase (turn on) when: almost always — this is the recommended
      default and helps training converge more evenly across all three
      outputs.
    Decrease (turn off) when: you want to experiment with training on raw
      percentage values directly, or are troubleshooting a
      normalisation-related issue.
    Recommended starting value: On (checked).

  EARLY STOPPING PATIENCE
    What it does: The number of epochs training will keep running without
      any improvement in validation loss before it automatically stops,
      to save time once the model has stopped learning anything new.
    Increase it when: your validation loss looks noisy/fluctuating and you
      want to give the model more chances to find a further improvement
      before giving up.
    Decrease it when: you want training to stop sooner once results
      plateau, to save time.
    Recommended starting value: 5.


SECTION 6 — EDITING IMAGES (CROP, FLIP, ROTATE)
----------------------------------------------------

Why edit images before training or grading? Cameras don't always frame a
sample perfectly. Cropping out background clutter, straightening a
sideways photo, or mirroring an image so all your samples "face" the same
direction helps the model focus on the bitumen sample itself rather than
irrelevant surroundings — which generally improves the model's predictions.

All edits are non-destructive until you confirm them, meaning you can
experiment freely and back out at any time before saving your changes.

  HOW TO CROP AN IMAGE
    1. Select the image's thumbnail so it appears in the editor panel.
    2. Click the "Crop" button.
    3. In the dialog that opens, drag the corners or edges of the
       rectangle to select the area you want to keep.
    4. Click "Confirm" to accept the crop, or "Cancel" to back out.

  HOW TO FLIP AN IMAGE
    1. Select the image's thumbnail.
    2. Click the "Flip Horizontal" icon button to mirror the image
       left-to-right, or "Flip Vertical" to mirror it top-to-bottom.

  HOW TO ROTATE AN IMAGE
    1. Select the image's thumbnail.
    2. Click "Rotate 90° CW" (clockwise) or "Rotate 90° CCW"
       (counter-clockwise) to turn the image a quarter-turn in that
       direction. Click the same button again to keep rotating further.

  UNDOING YOUR CHANGES
    - Click "Reset to Original" at any time before applying to discard
      all edits and start over from the untouched photo.
    - Once you are happy with your edits, look for the small yellow dot
      that appears whenever you have unsaved edits, then click
      "Apply Changes" to lock them in. Until you click Apply, your edits
      exist only in the preview and will not be used for training or
      grading.


SECTION 7 — MANAGING YOUR MODELS
-------------------------------------

HOW MODELS ARE NAMED AND STORED

  Every time you finish training a model, BitumenGrader saves two files
  into the application's "models" folder: one file holding the model's
  learned weights, and a matching file holding its metadata (creation
  date, the output normalisation stats for Water/Solids/Bitumen, its best
  validation MAE, and its full training history). Both files share the
  name you typed into the "Model Name" field when you started training,
  so choose a clear, descriptive name (for example "RefineryA_June2026")
  to make models easy to tell apart later.

HOW TO LOAD A PREVIOUS MODEL

  1. Click "Model Library" in the sidebar.
  2. Use the search bar at the top to filter by name if you have many
     models.
  3. Click "Load Model" on the card for the model you want. It becomes
     your active model immediately, ready to use on the Grade Images page.

HOW TO DELETE A MODEL

  1. On the model's card in the Model Library, click the red trash-can
     icon.
  2. Confirm the deletion in the dialog that appears. This permanently
     removes both of that model's saved files, so make sure you no longer
     need it (there is no undo).

WHY KEEP MULTIPLE MODELS?

  Keeping several models side by side is useful when you work with
  different sources of bitumen, different camera setups, or want to
  compare an older model's MAE against a newly retrained one before fully
  switching over. You can freely switch which model is "active" at any
  time without losing any of the others.


SECTION 8 — UNDERSTANDING YOUR RESULTS
-------------------------------------------

WATER, SOLIDS, AND BITUMEN PREDICTIONS

  For every image you grade, BitumenGrader predicts three percentages:
  Water content, Solids content, and Bitumen content. These are the
  application's best numeric estimate of what a full lab test would have
  measured for that sample, based on everything the active model learned
  from its training images. A well-formed sample's three percentages
  should add up close to 100% — see "The Sum Check" below.

MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR (MAE) IN PLAIN ENGLISH

  Every saved model's card, and the live training progress panel, reports
  an MAE (Mean Absolute Error) for each of Water, Solids, and Bitumen,
  shown as "±X.XX%". This is simply the average size of the gap between
  the model's predictions and the true lab-measured values across a set of
  images it was tested on. For example:

      "On average the model's Water prediction is within ±0.34 percentage
       points of the true lab value."

  A smaller MAE means more accurate, trustworthy predictions for that
  output. There is no single "good" MAE threshold that applies to every
  lab or sample type — instead, compare MAE across your own models over
  time, and treat a steadily shrinking MAE as a sign that a newly
  retrained model is an improvement over an older one.

THE SUM CHECK (SUM DEVIATION)

  Because Water + Solids + Bitumen should always add up to approximately
  100% for a real sample, BitumenGrader adds up the three predicted values
  and reports how far that sum strays from 100 as the "sum deviation." This
  acts as a built-in confidence signal that does not require any lab data
  to compute: a low sum deviation (under 2%) means the three predictions
  are highly self-consistent and more likely to be reliable; a high sum
  deviation (over 5%) is a warning sign that the model struggled with that
  particular image, even without knowing the true values — treat results
  like this with extra caution, and consider re-grading with a different,
  better-lit photo of the same sample.

WHAT TO DO IF MAE IS HIGH

  If a model's MAE (shown on its card in the Model Library, or in the live
  progress panel while training) looks too high for your needs, try the
  following, roughly in order:

  1. Collect more training images. A small or narrow training set is the
     most common cause of high MAE. Aim for the recommended minimum of 50
     images per Pan grade, ideally 200+ (see Section 4).

  2. Improve image consistency. Make sure your sample photos are in
     focus, consistently lit, and framed similarly to each other — a CNN
     learns visual patterns, so noisy or wildly inconsistent photos make
     those patterns harder to learn. Cropping out irrelevant background
     (see Section 6) also helps.

  3. Increase Epochs. If the live loss/MAE curves were still trending
     downward when training stopped, the model may simply not have had
     enough passes through your data yet — try training again with a
     higher Epochs value (see Section 5).

  4. Check your CSV for errors. A single mistyped Water/Solids/Bitumen
     value, or a filename that matched the wrong image, will actively
     mislead training. Re-open your CSV and spot-check a sample of rows
     against your lab records before retraining.


SECTION 9 — TROUBLESHOOTING
--------------------------------

  PROBLEM: The application won't start.
    Likely cause: Python is not installed, is an unsupported version, or
      the required libraries were never installed.
    Fix: Confirm Python 3.9+ is installed ("python --version"), then run
      "pip install -r requirements.txt" again from inside the
      BitumenGrader folder before trying "python main.py" once more. If
      an error dialog appears when launching, read its message — it is
      designed to explain what went wrong rather than crash silently.

  PROBLEM: A model won't load.
    Likely cause: The model's file was moved, renamed, deleted outside
      the application, or its saved file has become corrupted.
    Fix: BitumenGrader will show an error dialog and automatically clear
      the "active model" so you don't keep hitting the same failure. Open
      the Model Library and confirm the model still appears in the list;
      if not, retrain a replacement using the same or better images.

  PROBLEM: Training crashes or stops unexpectedly.
    Likely cause: An unusable image slipped into the training set, your
      computer ran out of memory, or a setting (like batch size) is too
      large for your hardware.
    Fix: Check the scrolling log in the progress panel for the specific
      error message. Try lowering the Batch Size, remove any images that
      failed to load (BitumenGrader will flag these with a red banner),
      and start training again. Training can also be stopped safely at
      any time with the "Stop Training" button if you need to change
      settings.

  PROBLEM: The model's MAE is high, or predictions seem unreliable.
    Likely cause: Not enough training images, images that are too
      similar to each other (little variety), incorrect Water/Solids/
      Bitumen values in the CSV, or too few training epochs.
    Fix: Double-check your CSV values against your lab records, add more
      and more varied images per Pan grade (50 minimum, 200+
      recommended), and try increasing Epochs slightly. See Section 5 for
      guidance on adjusting other hyperparameters, and Section 8 for more
      on interpreting MAE.

  PROBLEM: Images won't import.
    Likely cause: The file format isn't supported, or the file is
      corrupted/unreadable.
    Fix: Confirm your files are .jpg, .jpeg, .png, or .tif. If a
      particular file still fails, BitumenGrader will show an inline red
      message telling you it was skipped rather than stopping the whole
      import — try opening that file in another image viewer to confirm
      it isn't damaged, or re-export/re-save it in a supported format.


════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
  End of User Guide — BitumenGrader v1.0
════════════════════════════════════════════════════════
